canonical_definitions_v2:
  metadata:
    title: "VECTOR 1 — Operation NAMI Clearlane Canonical Definitions v2"
    status: "Proposed Canonical Upgrade"
    scope: "Interpretive, binding, non-structural"
    applies_to: "All VECTOR 1 artifacts, all models, all methods"

  foundations:
    - term: "Clearlane Core Premise"
      description: >
        Clearlane separates facts from claims.
        Facts may exist without certainty.
        Claims may not exist without sufficient support.

  authority_reference:
    - term: "Authority Reference (Canonical Definition)"
      description: >
        An authority_reference identifies a statute, regulation, or policy
        that independently establishes, constrains, or delegates enforceable
        legal or administrative power.

    - term: "Authority Qualification Rule"
      description: >
        A source qualifies as an authority_reference only if removal of that
        source would remove or alter enforceable power, obligation, or constraint.

    - term: "Authority Exclusions"
      description: >
        Systems, platforms, databases, websites, dashboards, and reporting tools
        are not authorities.
        They may implement, reflect, or surface authority but do not establish it.

    - term: "Administering Body (Canonical Constraint)"
      description: >
        The administering_body must be an entity capable of exercising or enforcing
        authority. Software systems and websites cannot be administering bodies.

  evidence_item:
    - term: "Evidence Item (Canonical Definition)"
      description: >
        An evidence_item is a tangible, external source that documents what exists,
        what is stated, or what is reported, independent of inquiry.

    - term: "Evidence Independence Rule"
      description: >
        An evidence_item must remain true and defensible if all other artifacts
        are removed.

    - term: "Evidence Boundary Rule"
      description: >
        Evidence does not assert authority, permission, eligibility, compliance,
        or correctness beyond what the source explicitly states.

    - term: "Evidence Examples"
      examples:
        - "TAGGS recipient listing"
        - "Statute text"
        - "Grant NOFO PDF"
        - "USAspending award page"
        - "IRS Form 990 filing"

  field_validation:
    - term: "Field Validation (Canonical Definition)"
      description: >
        A field_validation records the answer to one explicit, narrowly scoped
        validation question, derived from one or more evidence items.

    - term: "Field Validation Question Rule"
      description: >
        Every field_validation corresponds to exactly one validation question.
        If the question cannot be stated in one sentence, the validation is invalid.

    - term: "Validation Is Not Resolution"
      description: >
        Field validation records the state of inquiry, not its completion.
        It does not imply approval, permission, eligibility, funding, or compliance.

    - term: "Alignment Status Semantics"
      description: >
        open: the validation question has not been answered
        mixed: the answer is partially affirmative with constraints
        captured: the answer is affirmative for the specific question only

    - term: "Open Validation Rule"
      description: >
        Field validation artifacts may be created even when the validation
        question cannot yet be answered.
        An alignment_status of 'open' is valid and expected.

    - term: "Allowed Validation Question Classes"
      classes:
        - "Jurisdictional alignment"
        - "Operational alignment"
        - "Role alignment"
        - "Structural funding alignment"
        - "Evidence corroboration"

    - term: "Field Validation Examples"
      examples:
        - "Do TAGGS and USAspending both list Ozark Guidance Center as a recipient?"
        - "Is there a valid structural funding path from HHS to SAMHSA to Arkansas providers?"
        - "Does this SAMHSA-administered program apply within Arkansas?"

  money_flow:
    - term: "Money Flow (Canonical Definition)"
      description: >
        A money_flow describes a funding path or obligation between entities,
        grounded in authority and evidence.

    - term: "Money Flow Amount Interpretation"
      description: >
        The amount field records a known numeric value only.
        A value of 0 indicates that no quantified obligation has been asserted,
        not that zero dollars flow, unless explicitly stated by the source.

    - term: "Structural Money Flow Rule"
      description: >
        A money_flow with amount = 0 represents a validated structural funding path
        where authority exists but no award-level obligation has been asserted.

  artifact_composition:
    - term: "Artifact Autonomy and Support Rule"
      description: >
        Every artifact must be valid and defensible in isolation.
        Artifacts may support one another but are never subordinate.

    - term: "Split Not Stretch Rule"
      description: >
        When a source spans authority, evidence, validation, or funding,
        each aspect must be represented as a separate artifact.

  claims:
    - term: "Claim (Clearlane Definition)"
      description: >
        A claim is an assertion Clearlane is willing to make publicly or operationally.
        Claims may not be asserted unless sufficiently supported by artifacts.

    - term: "Claim Threshold Rule"
      description: >
        A claim may only be asserted if supported by at least two independent artifacts.

    - term: "Claim Assembly Bundle"
      description: >
        A Claim Assembly Bundle is a structured collection of two or more
        independent artifacts that jointly support a single explicit claim.

    - term: "Artifact Independence Rule (Claims)"
      description: >
        Artifacts supporting a claim must be independent in kind.
        Multiple artifacts derived from the same source do not constitute
        independent support.

  ambiguity:
    - term: "Ambiguity Handling Rule"
      description: >
        Ambiguity is a valid and expected state.
        Clearlane preserves uncertainty rather than collapsing it into confidence.

  summary:
    - term: "Clearlane Canonical Summary"
      description: >
        Authority names power.
        Evidence records facts.
        Validation answers questions.
        Money flow traces funds.
        Claims require bundles.
        Systems report; they do not govern.